<p>necessary to record:</p>
<p>A <em>beginning</em> is that which itself does not follow necessarily from anything else, but some second thing naturally exists or occurs after it. Conversely, an <em>end</em> is that which does itself naturally follow from something else, either necessarily or in general, but there is nothing else after it. A <em>middle</em> is that which itself comes after something else, and some other thing comes after it.</p>
<p>These are statements not about experience but about the uses of language to structure experience. In the same way, the Greeks created <em>categories</em> (this word originally meaning “accusations” or “predictions”) as a means of classifying animal species, insects, and fishes. In turn, they could then classify ideas. This was a radical, alien mode of thought. Plato had warned that it would repel most people:</p>
<p>The multitude cannot accept the idea of beauty in itself rather than many beautiful things, nor anything conceived in its essence instead of the many specific things. Thus the multitude cannot be philosophic.</p>
<p>For “the multitude” we may understand “the preliterate.” They “lose themselves and wander amid the multiplicities of multifarious things,” declared Plato, looking back on the oral culture that still surrounded him. They “have no vivid pattern in their souls.”</p>
<p>And what vivid pattern was that? Havelock focused on the process of converting, mentally, from a “prose of narrative” to a “prose of ideas”; organizing experience in terms of categories rather than events; embracing the discipline of abstraction. He had a word in mind for this process, and the word was <em>thinking</em>. This was the discovery, not just of the self, but of the <em>thinking</em> self—in effect, the true beginning of consciousness.</p>
<p>In our world of ingrained literacy, thinking and writing seem scarcely related activities. We can imagine the latter depending on the former, but surely not the other way around: everyone thinks, whether or not they write. But Havelock was right. The written word—the persistent word—was a prerequisite for conscious thought as we understand it. It was the trigger for a wholesale, irreversible change in the human psyche—<em>psyche</em> being the word favored by Socrates/Plato as they struggled to understand. Plato, as Havelock puts it,</p>
<p>is trying for the first time in history to identify this group of general mental qualities, and seeking for a term which will label them satisfactorily under a single type…. He it was who hailed the portent and correctly identified it. In so doing, he so to speak confirmed and clinched the guesses of a previous generation which had been feeling its way towards the <em>idea</em> that you could “think,” and that thinking was a very special kind of psychic activity, very uncomfortable, but also very exciting, and one which required a very novel use of Greek.</p>
<p>Taking the next step on the road of abstraction, Aristotle deployed categories and relationships in a regimented order to develop a symbolism of reasoning: logic—</p>
